---
title: "Precipitation nowcasting with generative diffusion models"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
status: published
permalink: /publication/2024-12-19-precipitation-nowcasting-with-generative-diffusion-models
excerpt: 'In our study, we focus on a specific subset of the ERA-5 dataset, which includes hourly data pertaining to Central Europe from the years 2016 to 2021. Within this context, we examine the efficacy of diffusion models in handling the task of precipitation nowcasting, with a lead time of 1 to 3 hours.'
date: 2024-12-19
venue: 'Applied Intelligence'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-024-06048-y'
citation: 'Asperti, Andrea, Merizzi, Fabio, Paparella, Alberto, Pedrazzi, Giorgio, Angelinelli, Matteo, and Colamonaco, Stefano. (2024). &quot; Precipitation nowcasting with generative diffusion models.&quot; <i>Applied Intelligence</i>. 55(1).'
---

In recent years traditional numerical methods for accurate weather prediction have been increasingly challenged by deep learning methods. Numerous historical datasets used for short and medium-range weather forecasts are typically organized into a regular spatial grid structure. This arrangement closely resembles images: each weather variable can be visualized as a map or, when considering the temporal axis, as a video. Several classes of generative models, comprising Generative Adversarial Networks, Variational Autoencoders, or the recent Denoising Diffusion Models have largely proved their applicability to the next-frame prediction problem, and is thus natural to test their performance on the weather prediction benchmarks. Diffusion models are particularly appealing in this context, due to the intrinsically probabilistic nature of weather forecasting: what we are really interested to model is the probability distribution of weather indicators, whose expected value is the most likely prediction. In our study, we focus on a specific subset of the ERA-5 dataset, which includes hourly data pertaining to Central Europe from the years 2016 to 2021. Within this context, we examine the efficacy of diffusion models in handling the task of precipitation nowcasting, with a lead time of 1 to 3 hours. Our work is conducted in comparison to the performance of well-established U-Net models, as documented in the existing literature. An additional comparative analysis has been done with the forecasting capabilities of the CERRA system, part of the Copernicus Climate Change Service. The novelty of our approach, Generative Ensemble Diffusion (GED), lies in its innovative use of a diffusion model to generate a diverse set of possible weather scenarios. These scenarios are then amalgamated into a single prediction in a post-processing phase. This approach mimics the usual weather forecasting technique consisting in running an ensemble of numerical simulations under slightly different initial conditions by exploiting instead the intrinsic stochasticity of the generative model. In comparison to recent deep learning models addressing the same problem, our approach results in approximately a 25% reduction in the mean squared error. Reverse diffusion is a core concept in our GED approach, is particularly relevant to weather forecasting. In the context of diffusion models, reverse diffusion refers to the process of iteratively refining a noisy initial prediction into a coherent and realistic forecast. By leveraging reverse diffusion, our model effectively simulates the complex temporal dynamics of weather systems, mirroring the inherent uncertainty and variability in weather patterns.
